feat(lsp): add `vim.lsp.config` and `vim.lsp.enable` (#31031)
neovim/neovim: runtime/doc/lsp.txt

    Example: >lua
      vim.lsp.config['my-server-name'] = {
        cmd = {'name-of-language-server-executable', '--option', 'arg1', 'arg2'},
        filetypes = { 'python' },
        -- Sets the "root directory" to the parent directory of the file in the
        -- current buffer (`args.buf`) that contains either a "setup.py" or a
        -- "pyproject.toml" file. Files that share a root directory will reuse
        -- the connection to the same LSP server.
        root_markers = {'setup.py', 'pyproject.toml'},
        -- Specific settings to send to the server. The schema for this is
        -- defined by the server.
        settings = {
          ...
        }
      }
<

3. Use |vim.lsp.enable()| to enable a configuration.
   Example: >lua
     vim.lsp.enable('my-server-name')
<

4. Check that the buffer is attached to the server: >vim
    :checkhealth vim.lsp

5. (Optional) Configure keymaps and autocommands to use LSP features.
   |lsp-attach|

                                                        *lsp-config*

Configurations for LSP clients is done via |vim.lsp.config()|.

When a LSP client starts, it resolves a config by first sourcing

> all the `lsp/<name>.lua` files in runtimepath. After that it merges

Author: Turned `runtimepath` into a reference `'runtimepath'`.

        root_markers = { '.luarc.json', '.luarc.jsonc' },

        -- Specific settings to send to the server. The schema for this is
        -- defined by the server. For example the schema for lua-language-server
        -- can be found here https://raw.githubusercontent.com/LuaLS/vscode-lua/master/setting/schema.json
        settings = {
          Lua = {
            runtime = {
              version = 'LuaJIT',
            }
          }
        }
      }
<
3. Use |vim.lsp.enable()| to enable a configuration.
   Example: >lua
     vim.lsp.enable('luals')
<
4. Check that the buffer is attached to the server: >vim
    :checkhealth vim.lsp
<
5. (Optional) Configure keymaps and autocommands to use LSP features.
   |lsp-attach|

                                                        *lsp-config*

Configurations for LSP clients is done via |vim.lsp.config()|.

When an LSP client starts, it resolves a configuration by merging
configurations, in increasing priority, from the following:

1. Configuration defined for the `'*'` name.

2. Configuration from the result of sourcing all `lsp/<name>.lua` files
   in 'runtimepath' for a server of name `name`.

>    Note: becuase of this, calls to |vim.lsp.config()| in `lsp/*.lua` are
>    treated independently to other calls. This is to ensure configurations
>    defined in `lsp/*.lua` have a lower priority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Note: because of this, calls to |vim.lsp.config()| in `lsp/*.lua` are
   treated independently to other calls. This ensures configurations
   defined in `lsp/*.lua` have a lower priority.
```

3. Configurations defined anywhere else.

Note: The merge semantics of configurations follow the behaviour of

> |vim.tbl_deep_extend()|.

Reviewer: This is definitely simpler to document/explain. But if `vim.merge` in the future would have more ideal behavior, maybe it's worth trying to anticipate those semantics, and then in the future this will say `following the behaviour of `vim.merge` ?

Author: I'm not sold on the premise of `vim.merge`, so I couldn't anticipate anything.

    vim.api.nvim_create_autocmd('LspAttach', {
      callback = function(args)
        local client = vim.lsp.get_client_by_id(args.data.client_id)

>         if client:supports_method('textDocument/implementation') then

Author: If someone makes and merges a change then I'll rebase over them.

    The second argument is the `ctx` of |lsp-handler|

config({name}, {cfg})                                       *vim.lsp.config()*
    Define default configuration for LSP clients.

    Use name '*' to set default configuration for all clients.

    Can also be used as a table.

    Examples:
    • Set default root marker for all clients: >lua
       vim.lsp.config('*', {
         root_markers = { '.git' },
       })
<
    • Set default configuration for clangd using table form: >lua
       vim.lsp.config.clangd = {
         cmd = {
           'clangd',
           '--clang-tidy',
           '--background-index',
           '--offset-encoding=utf-8',
         },
         markers = { '.clangd', 'compile_commands.json' },
         filetypes = { 'c', 'cpp' },
       }
<
    • Get configuration for luals: >lua
       local cfg = vim.lsp.config.luals
<

    Parameters: ~
      • {name}  (`string`)
      • {cfg}   (`vim.lsp.Config`) See |vim.lsp.Config|.

> enable({name}, {config})                                    *vim.lsp.enable()*

Reviewer: If there is potential that people will want to "disable" configs, then `{config}` arg will be able to take `false` in the future?

Reviewer: Do we even need a `config` arg on `enable()` or could we require a `vim.lsp.config()` call?

```lua
vim.lsp.config('foo', {...})
vim.lsp.enable('foo')
```

Author: It's up to you. I'm happy to allow a config arg to avoid boilerplate which is one of the goals of this PR.

We can allow `false` to be passed to disable a config. Do you want me to add that in this PR or can it be deferred?

Reviewer: > We can allow `false` to be passed to disable a config. Do you want me to add that in this PR or can it be deferred?

Can be deferred, just wanted to make sure the door is open for it. Might be worth a 1-line TODO comment.

> I'm happy to allow a config arg to avoid boilerplate which is one of the goals of this PR.

Most users that are using the default configs will only need to call `enable()` (no config-arg), right? I think it's perfectly find to require a `vim.lsp.config()` call for overriding defaults or redefining a config. And that cleanly separates the purpose of each, and also simplifies the docs.

Author: What's the plan for distributing default configs to users? Is it the rtp approach? Otherwise, when this is merged, and potentially for the 0.11 release, the common usecase will be providing `config()` and `enable()` together.

Reviewer: > the common usecase will be providing `config()` and `enable()` together.

Wouldn't that imply we are not providing any default configs? We do plan to provide default configs somehow. Perhaps starting by modifying nvim-lspconfig, and then upstreaming popular configs.

Author: > then Nvim itself does the config() call.

When/where? Via the rtp method via a future PR?

Author: One usecase that I've tried to cover is something like:

```lua
vim.lsp.enable('bashls', {
  filetypes = 'rando_bash_ft'
  settings = {
    bashIde = {
      shellcheckArguments = {
        '-e', 'SC2086', -- Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting
        '-e', 'SC2155', -- Declare and assign separately to avoid masking return values
      },
    }
  }
})
```

Where the passed config is partial and allows easily overriding default values.

If we require `vim.lsp.config()` for this then it becomes:

```lua
vim.lsp.config.bashls = vim.tbl_deep_extend('force', vim.lsp.config.bashls, {
  settings = {
    bashIde = {
      shellcheckArguments = {
        '-e', 'SC2086', -- Double quote to prevent globbing and word splitting
        '-e', 'SC2155', -- Declare and assign separately to avoid masking return values
      },
    }
  }
})

table.insert(vim.lsp.config.bashls.filetypes, 'rando_bash_ft')

vim.lsp.enable('bashls')
```

Not a deal breaker, but worth noting.

Author: > However we decide to do it, it will involve a config() call, right?

Yes, but also changes to `vim.lsp.enable()`.

I'm mainly asking because I think forcing `vim.lsp.config()` accelerates the need for us (or plugins) distributing default configs **efficiently**. If we want to defer that, then allowing config in `vim.lsp.enable` is a nice reduction in friction for the meantime.

Reviewer 2: Shipping default configs keeps coming up, but do we have some concrete examples of what that would entail?

For example, looking at `clangd` in lspconfig:

- cmd: `clangd`
- filetypes: `filetypes = { 'c', 'cpp', 'objc', 'objcpp', 'cuda', 'proto' },`
- root_dir: ` root_dir = function(fname)
      return util.root_pattern(
        '.clangd',
        '.clang-tidy',
        '.clang-format',
        'compile_commands.json',
        'compile_flags.txt',
        'configure.ac' -- AutoTools
      )(fname) or util.find_git_ancestor(fname)
    end,`

- `single_file_support`: Not in core, imho shouldn't be, that's `root_dir = nil`
- capabilities: These are off-spec definitions, not in scope of score
- commands: user commands, shouldn't be part of lsp interfaces. The functions they enable are also off-spec

---

I'm still unsure if defining root dir heuristics for the users is a good move as it can lead to surprising behavior. In vscode and all the other "easy to use" editors the choice is also made by the user.
In helix there are also issues about it doing the wrong thing.

_If_ we include them, we'd imho have to think how to surface it more prominently (e.g. different statusline defaults)

---

Speaking for how I'd use it, I'd use both lsp.config and lsp.enable pretty much 100% of the time.

Author: A lot of users will want to pull in these settings from somewhere even if it's just for command and filetypes.

I'm less concerned about including these in core, but more about enabling a general mechanism so plugins can provide these configurations passively. At least then this logic can be deferred to someone else to figure out instead of the user.

And obviously it's worth reiterating that the goal isn't a one size fits all, just most.

I also feel like you potentially attribute a lot more weight to potential issues here because you use java? For all the languages I use, this model fits very well. And for cases it doesn't, there's appropriate escape hatches to fix things.

Author: > Oh that's definitely less ergonomic. I guess you already considered this, but the obvious question is why can't we make config() have the same ergonomics as your enable() example?

Like your example, we can make `vim.lsp.config()` update a config, whereas `vim.lsp.config[name] = {}` completely redefines a config.

In the PR's current form, the config passed to `enable` affects the global config, but is lazy resolved. Not a big deal. 

Also something I've been trying to keep in mind, but haven't been able to implement is accommodating project specific instances of `vim.lsp.enable()`. But I haven't got anything, so lets go ahead with the simplification. I'll also remove the `*` configuration since that's not that useful in practice.

Reviewer 2: > I'll also remove the * configuration since that's not that useful in practice.

It would allow plugins that add extra capabilities not yet in core to set `lsp.config("*", { capabilities = ... })`

> I also feel like you potentially attribute a lot more weight to potential issues here because you use java? For all the languages I use, this model fits very well. And for cases it doesn't, there's appropriate escape hatches to fix things.

java is certainly a special snowflake but the issue with root dir detection is not limited to it.
There is a good chunk of closed issues in lspconfig related to servers not attaching, or starting more than one, or slow performance - all related in some way to root dir definitions. 
Murphy's law: Anything that can go wrong will go wrong. 
If users set it explicitly themselves they'd at least have some lead of what could've led to the issue. I agree that the goal isn't one size fits all, but if we do make a choice for users we need to think about how it affects users where the choice doesn't fit and how they can deal with it. One option I can think of is making root_dir choice and server count visible in statusline and maybe clickable to lead them to the health check or the docs for more info.
(Or simply not make the choice for them)

I raise this only as a concern for moving the root markers into core.

What I agree with or see as unproblematic:
- configs should be mergeable in some form, and plugins should be able to set them passivley. (Especially capabilities, since they have to be set before a client/server starts)
- server name -> filetypes mapping could be in core, that's less likely to cause issues. (In vscode that's something the language extensions define) although the "make it visible" aspect still applies somewhat.

> Is there really much issue with having vim.lsp.config() separated out (which does config merging)? It does simplify how to explain this.

No big deal, but I already see myself adding some kind of `enable(name, config)` that would call `lsp.config(name, config); lsp.enable(name)`  to avoid the `lsp.config(); lsp.enable() * server` pairs - so why not provide it?

Reviewer 3: > Shipping default configs keeps coming up

Yes, and partly my fault, so let me state clearly here what I meant by that:
1. We **want** to ship default configs with `nvim-lspconfig` (as that is that repo's purpose; i.e., the goal is not shipping something more but _removing everything else_).
2. We _then_ **might** want to ship default configs with Neovim for languages we think should be easy to set up out-of-the-box _but currently aren't_ -- that list may very well be empty (but may not necessarily stay that way). Potential candidates are `clangd` (too simple), `luals` (already handled by our editorconfig), `ts_query_ls` (not done yet).

TL;DR: the main target for "shipping configs" is nvim-lspconfig, _not_ core; that is just a door we're leaving open (at no current cost).

Author: > No big deal, but I already see myself adding some kind of enable(name, config) that would call lsp.config(name, config); lsp.enable(name) to avoid the lsp.config(); lsp.enable() * server pairs - so why not provide it?

Me too, and hence my initial pushback to Justin's comments. I agree with Justin that It does simplify the model and makes the accountabilities of each function very clear. And it's not a closed door to allow this in the future.

Reviewer 3: And given that the "real" target here is nvim-lsponfig, that strongly pushes us towards passive discovery on `rtp` because otherwise we'd need to keep some sort of setup logic in `nvim-lspconfig`, again duplicating logic. `rtp` precedence is also well-documented and (despite some hitches) established pattern for custom and overridden treesitter queries.

(If we go that route, an open question is about _merging_ matching configs on `rtp`, but I'm not convinced that needs to or should be part of the initial implementation. Worth keeping in mind, though.)

Author: > (If we go that route, an open question is about merging matching configs on rtp, but I'm not convinced that needs to or should be part of the initial implementation. Worth keeping in mind, though.)

We wouldn't have to merge. We can just source the files according to rtp rules. Each file can either call `vim.lsp.config()` to update a config, or use `vim.lsp.config[name] = ...` to redefine a config. It'll be down to the file what they want to do.

And to note the merging semantics I've added here will be `tbl_deep_extend` except:
- Lists: `filetypes` and `root_markers` are extended.
- Fields can be single or list (`on_attach`, `on_exit`, `on_init`), so they are coerced into a list.

Reviewer 3: Even better.

Reviewer: > > Is there really much issue with having vim.lsp.config() separated out (which does config merging)? It does simplify how to explain this.
> 
> No big deal, but I already see myself adding some kind of `enable(name, config)` that would call `lsp.config(name, config); lsp.enable(name)` to avoid the `lsp.config(); lsp.enable() * server` pairs - so why not provide it?

Because
1. it's confusing to explain (and understand, for users) how `config('foo', <config>)` differs from `enable('foo', <config>)`. If `config()` owns setting/merging configs then docs and concepts are simpler. That's gain is worth the cost of one extra function call (which will not even be needed for users that don't want to modify the default 'foo' config).
2. the door is open to extending `enable()` in a future PR.

    Enable a LSP server for filetype(s) to automatically start when opening a
    buffer.

    Uses default configuration defined with `vim.lsp.config`.

    Examples: >lua
          vim.lsp.enable('clangd', {
            cmd = { 'clangd', '--clang-tidy' },

>             root_markers = { '.clangd', 'compile_commands.json' },

Reviewer: For reference, in https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig/issues/1827 it sounds like tpope was infavor of this "declarative root_markers". Is this derived from that?

Whereas https://github.com/neovim/neovim/pull/18506#issuecomment-1121958744 was hesitant: 

>  root_markers as a list of strings should not be a baked in concept like this, there are too many special cases that require more complicated logic (nested git projects, rust, etc). I don't think it's good design to have essentially duplicate overlap with root_dir (which should be removed IMO in favor of the more generic workspaceFolders adopted by the spec)

Reviewer 3: I think `vim.fs.root` is the compromise we settled on? Allows specifying "declarative root markers" with minimal boilerplate while still allowing fully custom logic where needed.

Author: AFAIK this satisfies the large majority of use cases. If there are more complex cases then we can try to accommodate that in some way (with root_marker as function?), or defer them to use `vim.lsp.start()`.

At this point I think lspconfig has done enough baking; so we've got to be able to make progress, otherwise it will never happen.

To me saying root markers isn't a good enough general solution because of a few use cases is like saying treesitter isn't good enough because of a few languages.

Reviewer 3: Yes, all these comments were before we had `vim.lsp.start` in core, which is the "full control" interface (and working fine for that). This is a (hopefully thin) additional layer for specifying "static configs" which does not need to have the full expressivity. 

(That being said, allowing `root_markers` to be a function doesn't hurt -- unless someone again starts raving about "fully declarative configuration" -- but in no way needs to block the first implementation here. Let's start with the "90% at 10%" cases.)

Reviewer: Perfect. We have closed the loop here.

    The second argument is the `ctx` of |lsp-handler|

config({name}, {cfg})                                       *vim.lsp.config()*
    Define default configuration for LSP clients.

    Use name '*' to set default configuration for all clients.

    Can also be used as a table.

    Examples:
    • Set default root marker for all clients: >lua
       vim.lsp.config('*', {
         root_markers = { '.git' },
       })
<
    • Set default configuration for clangd using table form: >lua
       vim.lsp.config.clangd = {
         cmd = {
           'clangd',
           '--clang-tidy',
           '--background-index',
           '--offset-encoding=utf-8',
         },

>          markers = { '.clangd', 'compile_commands.json' },

Reviewer: root_markers?

       vim.lsp.config('*', {
         capabilities = {
           textDocument = {
             semanticTokens = {
               multilineTokenSupport = true,
             }
           }
         }
       })
<
    • (Re-)define the configuration for clangd: >lua
       vim.lsp.config.clangd = {
         cmd = {
           'clangd',
           '--clang-tidy',
           '--background-index',
           '--offset-encoding=utf-8',
         },
         root_markers = { '.clangd', 'compile_commands.json' },
         filetypes = { 'c', 'cpp' },
       }
<
    • Get configuration for luals: >lua
       local cfg = vim.lsp.config.luals
<

    Parameters: ~
      • {name}  (`string`)
      • {cfg}   (`vim.lsp.Config`) See |vim.lsp.Config|.

enable({name}, {enable})                                    *vim.lsp.enable()*
    Enable a LSP server for filetype(s) to automatically start when opening a
    buffer.

    Uses configuration defined with `vim.lsp.config`.

    Examples: >lua
          vim.lsp.enable('clangd')

          vim.lsp.enable({'luals', 'pyright'})
<

    Parameters: ~
      • {name}    (`string|string[]`) Name(s) of client(s) to enable.

>       • {enable}  (`boolean?`) `true|nil` to enable, `false` to disable.

Author: The `|nil` is not a part of the description, not the type.

>       • {enable}  (`boolean?`) `true|nil` to enable, `false` to disable.

Reviewer 3: No, it's important to have it exactly like this, since it explains what happens if `enable` is not passed.

>       • {enable}  (`boolean?`) `true|nil` to enable, `false` to disable.

Reviewer 3: (Could write "`true` or `nil` to enable", if that is clearer? But then it should be done consistently since we use that pattern elsewhere (and will use even more in the future).)

>       • {enable}  (`boolean?`) `true|nil` to enable, `false` to disable.

Reviewer 4: Oh I see. It looks good to me now that I read it correctly!

    See also: ~
      • |vim.lsp.log_levels|

> setup({config})                                              *vim.lsp.setup()*

Reviewer: I think config fits just fine here. Let's not introduce "setup".
